# steps
## I adopted from PL Course "Using Arrays and Collections in Typescript"
1. mkdir
2. cd into it
3. npm init -y
4. npm i -g typescript
5. tsc init --outDir dist --rootDir ts --sourceMap
	1. this will create ts config file
6. in vs code config launch: 
	1. type: node
	2. program: ${file}
		so we can use a terminal to issue 'tsc -w' 
		and use debug console to 'F5'

# add jest
npm i --save-dev jest
npm i --save-dev @type/jest
modify package.json script section: "test": "jest"
	so now we can run 'npm test'




server:
node server.js
client:
npm run start


# 2025 setup - simpler than before with tsx

## if locally
1. npm i typescript --save-dev
2. npm i tsx --save-dev
3. npx tsx hello.ts

### add angular signals to this non-angular ts project
1. npm i @angular/core --save
2. update hello.ts like:
```javascript
import { signal } from "@angular/core";

console.log("hello world");
const s = signal<string>("hello signals");
console.log(s());
```
3. if I run 'npx tsx hello.ts' now I get error: 
```
node_modules/@angular/core/discovery.d.d.ts:73:23 - error TS2304: Cannot find name 'PromiseSettledResult'.

73     running?: Promise<PromiseSettledResult<void>[]>;
                         ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

node_modules/rxjs/dist/types/internal/Observable.d.ts:117:35 - error TS2585: 'Promise' only refers to a type, but is being used as a value here. Do you need to change your target library? Try changing the 'lib' compiler option to es2015 or later.

117     toPromise(PromiseCtor: typeof Promise): Promise<T | undefined>;
                                      ~~~~~~~

Found 2 errors in 2 files.
Errors  Files
     1  node_modules/@angular/core/discovery.d.d.ts:73
     1  node_modules/rxjs/dist/types/internal/Observable.d.ts:117
```
4. to make this error go away: npm install @types/node --save
5. now I can run 'npx tsx hello.ts' and it works

### add rxjs to this non-angular project
same as adding angular/core
1. npm install rxjs --save
2. write rxjs code like 
```javascript
import { signal } from "@angular/core";
import { of } from "rxjs";
import { map } from "rxjs/operators";

console.log("hello world");
const s = signal<string>("hello signals");
console.log(s());

of(1, 2, 3)
    .pipe(map((x) => x * x))
    .subscribe((v) => console.log(`value: ${v}`));
```
3. run 'npx tsx hello.ts': it works

### to see the compiled js file
1. run npx tsc hello.ts
2. a "hello.js" is generated and you can view it.

so I simply create a folder, cd into the folder and execute the 3 command above, output of hello.ts is actually seen in console
no need to init a project or anything
## if globally
1. get node
2. npm i -g typescript
3. tsc --version



# 2025 Typescript: Configure and Compile Projects

## about
1. how to configure a TypeScript project with the tsconfig.json configuration file
2. how to tune, build performance, and output destinations for different output targets, like dev, testing, and production
3. how to organize a TypeScript project with modules and project references and share some organizational best practices

## steps

it's more common to create a build script that runs tsc for you, just in case you need to pass any arguments or flags. 
using Node.js as a JavaScript runtime and npm to run scripts. 

Node apps define a package.json file, and that has a scripts block. 
The key is the script name, and the value is the commands that will be run. 

define one script called build, 
define a run script named dev
, and then we'll run that JavaScript file with Node. Back in my project directory, I can see that there's only that TypeScript file and package.json file. Then I'll run the build script by typing npm run build. Run is the command and build matches that build script name that I defined in the package.json file. After running that, I can see the JavaScript version was generated by the compiler. I'll open both these files side‑by‑side, and that confirms that the JavaScript version removes the types from the TypeScript version, so the compiler worked.

1. npm i -g typescript: now you have tsc
