## The Tension Between EA and Agility

## Understanding Lean in Light of EA

### The Wastes in Lean Software Development

In lean, you have mudas or wastes, and lean defines these wastes specifically. I want to talk about a few that bear in particular on this tension between EA and agile. One of the big wastes in lean is partially completed work. That is a big waste whether you're talking about bits or atoms, software or manufacturing, or whatever. In the form of software, it's work that was done ahead of time. If it weren't ahead of time, it would just be work in progress, but we call it partially completed work, because notionally, we're not moving it towards completion at the moment. Now, I want to talk about the meta waste of EA that is partially completed work. A partially completed enterprise architecture artifact is one which, while it may appear to be complete and may exist as a checked‑off item on a list, it is incomplete because it is guaranteed to change in the future. This means that it is only partially complete. Part that remains to be completed exists only in the future when the knowledge that is necessary to complete it has been created by at least partially performing the work. The key thing about controlling this kind of waste is to draw out the premises and assumptions of EA about your project. A project needs a vision. It needs some kind of time frame, and it definitely needs a thoughtful approach to transition to a new way of doing things. But all those needs, and all those desires and pressures from stakeholders, they don't magically transform unknowns into knowns or even unknowables into knowables. One thing that is generally notable is how long and how much it will take to produce a given EA artifact. To take this out of the EA agile dichotomy for a minute, imagine you're at EA assigned to document the business structure in detail for a business which has just been the subject of a hostile takeover. You estimate it will take you at least two months to create the associated artifacts that would be useful. But in that time, the business structure is going to be entirely transformed, with significant players out and new ones in and communication pathways up in the air. This is a situation where any competent artifact is going to determine that the volatility or the churn of the artifact is going to be so high as to make the effort worthless. In this case, what is better is a JIT artifact that is easily changed. While a wiki is not entirely immune from dusty shelf syndrome, the parts that don't work can be quickly deleted or changed. Overprocessing means that in the process of creation, the product reached the point that the customer needed, but production continued and was overprocessed. In software development, the name for this is gold plating, when a software developer finishes their work and has slack at the end of a sprint that can result in this problem. But a bad artifact may specify overproduction if a better, simpler, and cheaper way of things is discovered in the process, or especially if it is discovered that a feature is no longer necessary. If the feature or implications of the feature like infrastructure are part of the enterprise architecture, it may end up being less trouble to implement the feature than to recast the artifacts. Here's an important idea. Zero‑waste endeavors are not real. Every human endeavor involves some degree of waste. The best you can do is choose your waste well. Suppose there's an asteroid headed towards Earth and it's going to kill a billion people. The world comes up with two different plans for diverting the asteroid. Plan A is certain to be completed in time, but has less of a chance of success, and Plan B has a high chance of success, but may not be completed in time. Money is no consideration. You have all the money and human resources in the world. Which do you choose? The correct answer is both. This strategy comes into play in less dramatic circumstances. If the schedule is the most important thing, then you can afford the wasted effort, the overproduction. Focusing on minimizing overproduction when there's an asteroid headed your way might end up in the waste form of a delay, which could be catastrophic. Let's talk about the waste of delays or waiting as it is defined as a muda. Delays are a waste that EA can mitigate with lean processes if pursued thoughtfully. And this is an area where EA can improve agile processes. Agile processes by their nature can lack long‑term vision. That's mostly okay because long‑term vision for software projects tends to be fantasy. But if your team has been so focused on getting development done that no one has bothered to initiate a mandatory six‑week security review of existing infrastructure that you need because it's a government contract, then a bunch of people are going to be sitting on their hands. Agile tends to be anti‑hierarchical, and whatever other problems there may be with hierarchy, at least you tend to know who is responsible for what. Lead blocking is how I describe the challenge. In American football, there's defensive blocking, where you're trying to stop the offensive player, and there's lead blocking, where you're on the offense and trying to clear a path for the main offensive player. Enterprise architecture can look down the road and identify where someone working is going to run into a roadblock. I used to do a bunch of single sign‑on projects for big corporations. And the second that the project was officially started, I instructed the IT department to begin the work of getting certificates set up. Sometimes this involved the process of figuring out which certificate would be used, and sometimes it would be determined that you couldn't risk using a particular certificate for a given SSO so you'd need to get a new certificate issued. At any rate, there were decisions to be made, and those decisions sometimes involved calendar days ticking by that couldn't be sped up. Given that I had automated all but a small part of my SSO stuff, that process usually took longer than it took me to develop the SSO, so it was important that it began as early as possible. The waste of waiting and handoffs are related because of packing ratios. A packing ratio is a metaphor here. Packing ratio is how much an actual container can use given the shape of the object it stores. If you have a square box and it is going to store a sphere, you're going to have some significant space wasted because of the differing dimensions. You take the volume of the sphere, you divide it by the box, that's your packing ratio. If you pack increasingly small spheres, the packing ratio first falls, but then begins to rise. The packing ratio for a box and a sphere can never be 100%, but the smaller the sphere is, the higher the packing ratio you get. Handoffs, by which I mean transferring responsibility for working on something from one person to another, has two primary wastes. The most obvious waste is ramp time, the time the new person has to spend to get to their maximum productivity with the new task. The other kind of waste is slack time introduced because there's nothing the new person can accomplish before they begin working on the new task. This is the packing ratio. There's a spherical handoff headed your way, and there's no additional task shape that you can fit into the box before it gets here. So the time between the last thing the new person accomplished and the new task gets here is waste. You want to keep the packing ratio high because that's minimizing waste, and the solution is kind of the same for both problems. The first thing the good enterprise architecture can help with is preventing handoffs from happening in the first place. Certain handoffs are inevitable because they cross zones of responsibility, like when you deploy and the software crosses from being the primary responsibility of the programmers to becoming the primary responsibility of IT. Even then, EA can define deliverables to make the handoff as short and as clean as possible. Where handoffs are unavoidable, EA can, for example, direct for sprint planning prior to a handoff that lower point and therefore smaller tasks are prepared to fill idle time in advance of a handoff.

### The Priority of EA and the Priority of Lean

There are a couple of themes emerging from what we're talking about here. I think it's more useful to talk about the results we get when we practice each of these disciplines well. Critiquing them when they're done poorly is like complaining that you're gaining weight on a diet you're not sticking to. So, we'll stipulate that you're doing EA well and effectively according to the precepts and measures that EA specifies for itself, and your developers are practicing agile though, and not overburdening everybody with ceremonies and bookkeeping. Given those circumstances, how are we reconciling the two and what remains in conflict? I'm going to give you a dense statement and we'll unpack it. 

Enterprise architecture and lean have opposing epistemological premises. 

epistemological
Epistemology is the study of the nature, origin, and limits of knowledge. 

We look back on these Salem witch trials as a despicable primitive affair, and they were, but we say this with a critical piece of knowledge that the people of Salem back then lacked, that there is no such real thing as witches, that the crimes for which the witches were being punished were not physically possible. Was it possible to know that there were no witches? That's an important question in judging the witch trials from our modern standpoint. If you get that question wrong, whether witches exist or not, you get innocent people killed. Consider if you believed that witches weren't real and they were. In that case, the victims of the witchcraft are the innocents instead of the witches like it was in reality. The important question is an epistemological one, whether it's possible to know or not. 

Here's a less dense, very important statement. We are subject to realities, whether we know about them or not. 
That's true in life all over the place, but especially in project management. 
EA and lean represent two different approaches to this problem of being subject to unknown realities. 
The enterprise architect works hard to quantify as much as possible, and lean emphasizes minimizing commitment so that the cost of a false premise is minimized. 
EA would emphasize a detailed investigation into the existence of witchcraft, and lean would hedge bets against either belief about witchcraft being wrong. 

So where does this leave us? There's an old and fake quote from Einstein, make things as simple as possible, but no simpler. He never said it, but it doesn't matter. It's a great quote. I think that the lodestar for reconciling EA and lean goes something like this. Treat things as quantifiable as is possible, but no more quantifiable. 
I think that if you're in an enterprise working with enterprise architecture and lean or another flavor of agile, you really need to hang that sign on the wall. 
Agile can hand wave over important questions and dismiss them as being further down the road. It can treat things as being less quantifiable than they really are. And enterprise architecture can try to design things far in advance of when the knowledge needed to design them exists, treating things as more quantifiable than possible. When you're considering this question, ask yourself whether you and your team can know whether there are witches or not. This is all coming down a little bit as anti‑enterprise architecture, so I want to re‑emphasize a point I made earlier, that there are entire swathes of EA that have no tension with agile at all. 
To the extent that EA is descriptive rather than prescriptive, there's no tension with lean at all in so far as EA is describing things that are plainly quantifiable. Enterprise architecture done properly should be operating at a level of abstraction, at least several notches higher than software architecture, and if it's not, that's not proper EA anyway.

### Optimize the Whole

I want to zoom in on another key lean principle, optimize the whole. Optimizing the whole is definitely something that enterprise architecture can enable. I want to start with an example where I sure wish there had been some decent enterprise architecture performed on a project I worked on. I was a consulting developer for a big telecom company whose name you would recognize. This was back in the early 2000s, 2001, and the development landscape was very different. One of the early battles I fought was insisting that my code be in version control. This was well before Git was released, and version control was much more painful, but I nevertheless treated it as a non‑negotiable. In the end, I was the only developer on the team for this company whose code was in version control. Not long after all this played out, the company web servers were infected by a worm, Code Red. The worm rewrote the code for the website, and only my part of the code was in version control. Luckily, it had enough of the rest of the code base to do another deployment, and that was able to get rid of the infection. I wasn't exactly performing enterprise architecture, but I had identified that kind of problem, being the kind of risk that justified the pain of version control. Goodier can identify risks which may introduce short‑term process pain that lean and agile might optimize away, but is valuable in the long run. I had been brought on primarily to work on a system for managing the image assets of the company. The company would license images from the copyright holder like Shutterstock for a year. Then someone else in the company would license the same photograph simply because they weren't aware that it was already licensed. I was to create a system that all that could be entered into, and then someone could enter search terms, find the kind of image they were looking for, and find one that was already licensed. I was using bee trees to connect the term like woman to women and to girl, which today is absolutely no big deal, but it was cutting‑edge stuff back in 2001. I worked hard on it, it was super cool, and the project was complete. The next phase would be to present this to the IT team for provisioning the infrastructure resources the app would need, a simple IAS server and two databases in a cluster, in my case. The meeting was a big circle of people. Each project was addressed one by one. When it came to me, I laid out what I needed and explained why. The IT guys looked at the project, asked a few questions, and consulted a policy grid for determining the value of the project and costing it. After a few minutes, they determined that the cost of the servers outweighed the value of the project and moved on. I didn't realize it at first, the project I just spent 6 months working on, accruing consultant dollars all the way, had just been thrown in the garbage because there had been no enterprise architecture at the outset to determine that the project wasn't worth doing. And make no mistake, while not everything can be predicted and known in advance, everything they used in the meeting was something they could have known six months earlier. A more encouraging case of optimizing the whole, the ring vaccination policy in smallpox eradication. Smallpox absolutely ravaged the world prior to eradication. In the early 20th century, there were between 1 and 2 million deaths annually. That's about the death rate of COVID. Imagine COVID running constantly for decades on end. Vaccination against the major strain began in the 50s, and the disease was finally eradicated in 1980. One of the chief strategies in eradication was ring vaccination. Rather than simply focusing on the narrow measure of vaccinating as many people as possible, special care was made to vaccinate people in the vicinity of someone who had already contracted it. This created a barrier of immunity that stopped the virus from spreading. This is a good time to introduce a concept we're knocking on the door of, Goodhart's Law. Put super simply, it is, once a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure. The reason for this is that on one hand, people game the system to satisfy the measure beyond what optimality demands for their own purposes. And on the other hand, it puts blinders on people and prevents them from considering more useful measures. It would have been entirely rational to simply make total people vaccinated, the measure to aim for, but by reserving resources that would have been used to meet that measure and instead using them in the more complex and time‑consuming endeavor of ring vaccination, the overall eradication goal was reached much sooner and more lives were spared. The key lesson of all this is to take a holistic view of what's good for the enterprise. I can conjure a near inexhaustible supply of anecdotes where short‑term and narrow optimization injures the enterprise at large. Going all in on arbitrage nets Enron enormous short‑term profits that kills the company when the opportunity passes, Blockbuster focusing on gaining a larger share of declining videotape rental market, of Houston Airport moving the gates further from baggage claim in order to cut down on customer complaints about baggage delays. The key thing is to consider thoughtfully, what is the true interest of the enterprise, and come up with a plan that optimizes that instead of a particular metric.

### The Issue of Scale in Planning

Let's talk about scale. The kind of scale I'm talking about might be better described as the level of abstraction. What level of abstraction are we talking about? Are we talking about design drawings of a car or are we talking about which ball bearings are going to be used in the hubs? The answer to this question is important because different levels of abstraction potentially have greater or less knowability. When you talk about EA to most technical people, unfortunately, there's an immediate confusion with software architecture. EA is not SA, and when it ends up being software architecture, it is operating at the wrong level of abstraction, irrespective of the larger question of knowability. The problem is compounded in medium or small businesses, where it may be the same person performing necessary EA and also operating as the software architect. I've been there. We've talked enough about deferred commitment. Lean has other superpowers for filling in those gaps. One of those powers is pushing back on the idea that there is a single answer. By delivering continually and iterating on multiple solutions, you can end up with something that is better than what an EA would have come up with. Another associated practice of lean, the five whys, allows you to perform quick root cause analysis. EA might identify a naive and monocausal solution to a problem, necessarily naive because root cause analysis hasn't been performed. Figuring out exactly where the boundary between the high‑level EA and the lower level lean practices meet is an enterprise‑specific challenge you'll have to resolve.

### Criticisms of Enterprise Architecture

I want to address some of the criticisms of EA. Don't worry, we'll do the same for agile afterward. Compared to agile, anything else is slow to change, but there's more to it than that. We all had a meeting, we sat there for 3 hours, we hammered out what the broad hardware specification was for the infrastructure and what it was going to be. And then in the middle of the project, you find you need something more or especially if you find you need something less. It's simply human nature to not want to invite the argument of making the change. There's a related problem called reification. Reification is the confusion of a model with the reality it describes. Back when printed maps were still a thing, cartographers would place fake towns on maps as copyright traps. If you then copied the map without doing the research yourself as a cartographer, the mapmaker could sue you for copyright infringement. These were called paper towns. If you then drove to one of these paper towns, you would find that there was an important difference between the model, your map, and the reality because the town didn't exist. Or did it? To further confuse the issue, at least one town, Algoe, New York, was a paper town that became a real town, as locals named their business after the copyright trap on the map. The town was reified, made real from the fantasy that existed only in the model. My point with this is that if you place things in your enterprise artifacts, you can expect them to become real, whether or not they are optimal, unless you're feeding back from agile processes. Another criticism of EA is that it is overly complex. I can tell you that, as a programmer, given the choice between reading the documentation for code or simply reading the code, I will read the code every time, even if it's in a language I'm not terribly familiar with. So complexity is not really the problem, it's opacity. You have the same problem in software architecture with UML. UML stands for Unified Modeling Language, and I try to stamp out its use everywhere I go. The problem is that UML is not sufficiently widely adopted by programmers, the ostensible consumers of documents. And if it were going to be, it would have been by now. Given that that's true, you know, we don't use Egyptian hieroglyphs in our documents, no matter how well they might work in the abstract, so we shouldn't use UML. So when people say that EA artifacts are overly complex, they're really asking this, create artifacts that laymen can understand. That goes double for software architecture and lean. You saw the BDD requirement. I like to describe BDD as grandma compliant. Grandma may not understand telemetry in a spacecraft, but she can understand that BDD requirement. But here's the hard part, something I've learned over many years. Making things complicated is simple. Making things simple is complicated. Complexity and communication is something to be grappled with and ultimately defeated. If your communication is still more complex than it absolutely needs to be, given the problem domain, the work isn't done.

### Criticisms of Lean

We challenged enterprise architecture, now let's talk about criticisms of lean. I know I said that we're going to engage with these two methodologies practiced well, but I think the burden of ceremonies is the most effective criticism of lean and agile as they are practiced today, so let's talk a bit about that. Why do enterprises have pointless ceremonies and waste everyone's time? Well, one answer is that the team is in transition from a time when they made more sense and is in the process of learning that the ceremonies as practiced may be waste. But the larger answer is probably a bit more depressing. When I was a very young programmer, I worked with older programmers who introduced me to the phrase, nobody gets fired for buying IBM. IBM was once, decades ago, an absolute Goliath in the computer industry, and it was considered the very safe and reliable choice. If something went wrong with the project later on, no one would be blamed for having bought IBM based on its reputation. Keep in mind, IBM wasn't necessarily the fastest computer or the cheapest or the best in any way other than that it provided political cover for the people buying it. I think something similar is contributing to the corruption of agile, with over ceremonialism, to coin a phrase. The agile ceremonies, stand‑ups, backlog grooming sessions, sprint retros, and others, these are meant to be tools in a toolbox. Part of the problem with the Agile Manifesto is that it was written by folks who were probably the top 1% of programmers, and high performers have certain characteristics that are different from everybody else. Speaking as someone who's been blessed with a highly successful software career, I can tell you that high performers say this, I want the responsibility on my shoulders where it belongs. If you have a bunch of people like that, no one is going to have any problems skipping stand‑ups or deciding that we can burn down the existing backlog some before we need more grooming. I think that for people who don't want responsibility on their shoulders, there's always an argument for more ceremonies. When things go badly, that person can say whatever went wrong, we were following the guidance for agile practice to the letter, except that the idea was always for agile to be run with highly self‑managing teams. And my advice to everyone is that if you can afford to have a team full of top people, that team will get you the best return on your developer's salary investment. But when you have a team that is more in the productivity middle, having more data in Jira about what's going on always provides better political cover.

### A Path Forward for Lean and EA

Okay, that was pretty frustrating. Let's look at some of the positive ways forward with all this. Like I've said a couple of times now, if EA is operating well and at the proper level of abstraction, it is mostly descriptive and only partly prescriptive. To the extent that it is prescriptive, it should be describing means which are fundamental to the outcome and without which the project doesn't make sense. I was invited to participate in a brainstorming session for a possible aviation startup. The idea was to create a device that would store maintenance history for private aircraft. We spent some time working through what the connectivity path would be, would be an occasionally connected model, how rugged the device needed to be, how we would attach it to a broad range of aircraft interiors, and then it hit me. Why do we need a physical device at all? The records that the device was to store were all FAA maintenance codes combined with a registry number for the aircraft. Instead of the physical device, all the records could be input by the mechanic who had his own FAA credentials, then sent up to a central store in the cloud. The problem with the discussion is that the startup guys had already zoned in on a means to the end instead of focusing on the end, the effective storage and retrieval of aircraft maintenance records. I earned my fee for those guys by iterating through several rounds in my head and realizing that the hardware was useless. A lot of this boils down to the old saw from Peter Drucker and some other folks along the way, Efficiency is concerned with doing things right. Effectiveness is doing the right thing. Lean is indispensable as a means for doing things right, for capturing efficiency and productivity and pursuing goals. On top of that, lean practices are important for refining goals, not merely by adding detail, but by iterating and revealing possibilities that weren't clear from the outset. Lean does things right, and EA must provide guidance, contexts, and artifacts so that the right things are done. Without effective EA, you get a well‑built system you can't afford to use like the telecom customer did with my image library. Without effective lean principles, you end up building a hardware device you didn't need when all you need is a registry number and a mobile app.

## EA and Lean in Practice