==========================================================

# Exploring Lean Principle, by Chris Behrens


We've moved into an area that ties directly back to the manufacturing routes of Lean, Root Cause Analysis. One of the most powerful tools for RCA is The Five Why's. The Five Why's is a technique developed by Sakichi Toyoda and Taiichi Ohno where you ask why a defect occurred five times, driving more deeply with each question and seeking the root cause for the problem. Here's an example. 

Chernobyl was the worst nuclear reactor disaster in history. 
Why? Because the operator attempted to restart the reactor too quickly after it had fallen below a critical rate of reactivity. 
Why? Because he was ordered to by his superior. 
Why? Because they were desperate to complete a test that was months behind schedule. 
Why? Because the reactor had been built too quickly in order to meet arbitrary deadlines. 
Why? Because the organization had a culture that placed political ends over the concerns of engineers. 
In short, the answer to the final why is that people didn't listen. 

The Challenger shuttle disaster killed seven astronauts. 
Why? Because an O‑ring didn't deform properly to maintain a seal in a solid rocket booster. 
Why? Because the shuttle was launched when the outside temperature was below the range within which the material in the O‑ring reacted properly. It was too cold. 
Why? Because NASA administrators had ordered the launch. 
Why? Because NASA culture promoted can do attitudes over people who talked about problems and grossly underestimated the rate of failure per launch. 
Why? Because the organization had a culture that placed political ends over the concerns of engineers. 
Again, the final why is that people didn't listen. 

NASA had learned the lesson of Apollo 1, and had gotten much better at imagining failure. But once their engineers had imagined failure, it was the duty of the administrators to listen to them. Chernobyl happened in a system designed from top to bottom on the premise of the infallibility of the state and of central planning. There was no andon for the Chernobyl operators to pull, or for the reactor designers, or for the community that would be shattered when the reactor exploded on April 26, 1986. 

In the end, all engineering failures happen for a combination of two reasons; a failure of imagination and a failure to listen. 

Lean can give us good tools to help us imagine failure, but it's our duty to listen to what we are told, no matter who it comes from, as an implication of the respect people principle.


# Creative Problem Solving and Decision Making Techniques
-- Milena Pajic

### Techniques in a nutshell
#### Fishbone Diagram

One more tool that can be used for finding out and analyzing causes and effects is a fishbone diagram, or cause and effect diagram. This diagram is also known as an Ishikawa diagram by its creator's name. Just like the previously described tool in the relationship diagram, this tool is also the next step to take after brainstorming and it facilitates discovering the causes and effects of the given problem. Before we begin to look for a solution, this tool encourages you to think and analyze what the main causes of the existing issues are. Once those causes have been identified, the attention should be focused on removing them. Removing the root cause will implicitly lead to solving the given problem. The main purpose of this tool is to group the ideas generated during brainstorming into so‑called bones, sorting them into useful categories. Due to this way of grouping that resembles a fish skeleton, the diagram got its name, fishbone diagram. I will now explain to you how to draw the diagram. I drew the diagram you see in the slides using the XMind software. Drawing of this diagram starts by writing down and framing the problem to be sold on the right side of a piece of paper or whiteboard somewhere around the middle. After this, a horizontal line is drawn from left to right. The framed problem represents the head and the horizontal line the spine of the fishbone. The next step is to draw lines upwards and downwards from the spine. These lines, resembling bones on a fish skeleton, are used for writing the main factors, that is categories of causes that produce the given problem. The bones in a fishbone diagram therefore represent the causes, whereas the head, or the problem that needs to be solved, is the effect. If you wish, you can draw arrows as well. The arrows on the diagram should be drawn in a way that the bones point to the spine and the main arrow on the spine points to the head. After this, discussion follows for each factor and the main cause, that is for each presented bone. Questions are asked, such as why is this causing the problem, why does this cause occur, and so on? Based on these questions and answers to them, additional causes and sub‑causes are drawn. This technique of asking questions is known as five whys, and it's advisable to use it in this analysis. The five whys technique implies that the root cause can be discovered in most cases by asking five why questions. The key is to ask the questions in such a way that the answer to one question represents the basis for asking the following question. While you're drawing a fishbone diagram, you'll notice that some causes appear at several places, which is fine. An Ishikawa diagram, just like an interrelationship diagram, can be used after a brainstorming session in order to structure and sort a large number of issues into useful categories. The main goal of this diagram is therefore to break the root causes of a certain problem, that is affect into details and to categorize them. This tool also allows for analysis to be branched in order to provide multiple root causes.

# Business Analysis: Putting People First
-- Heather Mylan-Mains

## Solving the right problem
### The Five Whys

It can be difficult to understand the root cause of the problem. The five whys is a technique to help us understand that. This is a chance to let out our inner 2‑year‑old curiosity. If you've spent time around 2‑year‑olds lately, you'll remember the frequency of the question why. Two‑year‑olds are curious. They are interested in everything around them, how it works, what the purpose of it is, which is why they ask why. There is power in asking why. This approach is effective because it's simple. It doesn't require special training. In fact, the only thing you need is curiosity. Oftentimes, our stakeholders will give us the request just like this date added to a field request. It's an order that's going to solve a symptom, but not likely solve the root cause problem. If we were to only solve the symptoms, our stakeholders would continue to have different problems. So we strive to look to understand what the root of the problem is. The approach is simple. We keep asking questions until we get to the root. People don't knowingly withhold what the problem is they themselves may not understand. So this process helps us to discover it. Eventually, we're going to get to the root of the problem, the one that we want to solve and make sure our solutions fit the needs for. Since this request is about a document due date, I have lots of questions about that due date. Let's work through the five whys and see if we can get to the root of the problem. I'm going to start with asking the question why were the filing dates missed? We find out it's because no one submitted the filing on the due date. Okay, that's interesting, but why did no one submit the filing on the due date? Because the team wasn't aware of the deadline until after it had passed. We're getting more information, but we're still not there yet. Why wasn't the team aware of the deadline? Because the filing calendar was tracked manually by one person and not shared with others. Aha, getting closer. A couple more. Why did only one person track the filing calendar? Because there was no centralized system or process to record, monitor, and communicate filing deadlines. We're getting closer. Last why. Why was there no centralized process? Because responsibility for compliance tracking was never formally assigned, and no automated notifications were in place. We are now getting closer to understanding what our solution needs to look like to make sure that we can track filing dates. I want to add that although the technique is called five whys, it could be that you only need one or two whys. It could mean that you need seven. You're going to keep asking why until you feel like you've got to the bottom or the root of whatever the problem is. So for our request, if we were only to add a field to the system, which they do need, would that solve their problem? It would not because we need to understand a process. We need to implement some rules to create safeguards to understand that day better.

# Understanding Lean and Value-driven Delivery
-- Chuck Cobb

## Lean Software Development and Value Stream Analysis


### Value Stream Analysis

The next subject I want to talk about that is very closely related to lean software development is the concept of value stream analysis. Here's a definition of what value stream analysis is. The value stream is the entire collection of activities necessary to produce and deliver a product or service. Value stream analysis separates those activities that contribute value creation from activities that create waste, and identifies opportunities for improvement. This topic is very much related to the area of lean software development because you would use a value stream analysis to go through an entire process and identify the portions that provide value and the portions that do not provide value and could be trimmed or eliminated. The idea of a value stream analysis originated in a manufacturing environment with lean manufacturing, and the general concept can also be applied to a software development environment. Value stream mapping is an essential element of value stream analysis and is a lean management method for analyzing the current state and designing a future state for a series of events that take a product or service from its beginning through to the customer. At Toyota, it is known as "material and information flow mapping." A value stream analysis can either be a rigorous and detailed analysis of a process or a more higher‑level analysis of a process, depending on the situation. In a typical agile project, you wouldn't typically find highly detailed processes that would lend themselves to an elaborate value stream analysis. But the principles behind doing a value stream analysis would be very worthwhile for a more higher‑level analysis of the process. You're more likely to find a rigorous and detailed analysis of a process in processes that are much more stable and well‑defined. The most important purpose of value stream mapping is to visualize how a process works to make it easier to see waste in the process in order to highlight problems and develop proposed countermeasures. However, beyond that, a value stream map provides a holistic, interconnected customer perspective of how a process works that helps everyone involved in the process align their efforts around a common purpose and goal. It also serves as a useful management tool for continuously measuring, analyzing, improving, and controlling the interrelated processes in a value stream. This slide shows an outline of the steps for creating a value stream map. The first step is to select the process to map. Next, there is a need to bound the process by clearly defining the endpoints. Normally, a value stream map is done from a customer perspective and the endpoints or customer events. Usually a cross‑functional team that is responsible for the process defines the process steps that take place in the process from end to end. The next steps are to add information flows and collect process data that is relevant to the process, such as the cycle time required for each step in the process. All the previous steps are done to create what is called the current state map. No attempt is made to improve the process at this point. The final step is to identify wastes and inefficiencies and to define the future state or the ideal state that will implement improvements in the process to correct the wastes and inefficiencies. This slide shows an example of what a current state value stream map might look like. It maps the flow of the process from the time a customer requests a new feature until the time that feature is released to production. At this point, the goal is to simply map the process as is without attempting to improve it. Once the current state has been defined, more effort will be applied to identify the sources of waste in the process and to identify opportunities for improvement to be implemented in the future state. A useful technique for identifying waste in a value stream map is called the "Five Why's." It involves asking the question of why something is done repeatedly, up to five times, if necessary, to understand the reason why something is really done. Here's an example. In the value stream map I just showed you, you might ask the question of, "Why does the project manager create a plan and schedule?" And the immediate answer might be, "Because it is required for the business sponsor to approve it." A good value stream analysis wouldn't accept an answer like that at face value, and you might want to probe further and ask the question as to, "Well, why does the business sponsor need to improve it?" And the answer might be, "Because the business sponsor has not delegated authority to the Product Owner to make that decision." Probing still further, you might ask the question, "Well, why hasn't the business sponsor delegated authority to the Product Owner to make that decision?" And the answer might be, "Because the business sponsor likes to have tight control over everything in the process." That indicates a potential major opportunity for improvement. If we can convince the business sponsor to give up tight control over everything in the process, there's a big opportunity to eliminate all the steps associated with developing a formal project plan and having it reviewed and approved by the business sponsor. The future state diagram might look something like this after the approval process by the business sponsor is eliminated. I'm sure that there are other improvements that could also be made in this process, and the analysis would continue as far as necessary to further optimize it. This is a relatively simple example, but it's probably somewhat typical of what you might find in a software development process. In a manufacturing process, a value stream analysis would likely be much more detailed and much more rigorous and include a lot of data, such as the average cycle time in each step of the process. In the next lesson, we're going to start a new module on value‑driven delivery, and the first lesson in that module is an overview of value‑driven delivery.


# Beginner's Guide to Business Analysis
-- Casey Ayers

## Getting started with Business Analysis

### Identifying Root Causes

All too often when business analysis efforts fail to result in solutions that truly improve the situation for organizations, it's because we failed to identify what the true root cause is behind the challenges that we're facing. We can help to solve this by following a number of different techniques in our analysis work, helping to hone in on what the exact problem might be and ensuring that our solution is best aligned to rectifying it. 

The first of these techniques is the use of fishbone or Ishikawa diagrams. These are helpful cause‑and‑effect visualizations, often used alongside the Five Whys method that we'll discuss. Problems or situations are placed at the head of the fish all the way to the right of the visualization with potential causes and subcauses following on the bones that follow. Let's take a look at an example. If we begin with a problem way out here on the right, then we can see various cause categories and room for us to include a variety of primary causes, as well as potentially secondary or even tertiary causes as we find necessary to better understand the root of the challenges we're facing. For example, some of these primary cause categories could include equipment, processes, people, materials, our external environment, or management. Within equipment, we might find that it's inferior equipment that's a primary cause of our problem here. We may find that inefficient workflows are an issue for process, and improper training might be a problem in our people category. Further down into secondary categories of these areas, we might find that within processes, the reason our workflows are inefficient is because of unoptimized steps and duplicative work. Whereas, the issue we have with improper materials might include poor quality or simply the wrong materials being ordered in the first place. Following this line of thought can help us not only in identifying what the problem might be, but also in determining what might be most useful to speak with stakeholders about as part of elicitation sessions. Interrelation diagrams can be useful in this regard as well, helping us to visualize the complex relationships that might exist between many different variables. Causes maybe the effects of other problems or vice versa, and so understanding how each of these different elements might relate to one another can help us to have a better understanding of the entire picture of the challenge that we might be facing. For example, we might be investigating why we're facing decreased sales revenue, and this is the initiation point for our analysis efforts. We may find that among the various effects of this decrease in sales revenue are a loss of purchasing power for the organization, as well as budget cuts to our quality assurance processes. This loss of purchasing power could result in fewer procurement options being available to us and then inferior production materials going into our production system. This might lead to decreased customer satisfaction, as well as an increased rate of product defects, which, of course, isn't helped either by our quality assurance budget cuts. All of these can relate in an acceleration of the decrease in our sales revenue and of our customer satisfaction, leading again even further to our revenue's decline. This decrease in customer satisfaction and decreasing sales revenue can also lead to a further loss of purchasing power. You can see how this can put us into a tailspin of sorts where eventually things continue to get worse and worse. This is, of course, a situation that we would like to avoid and so understanding how all of these different elements might be tied to one another could help us to determine one of our suggestions to be not cutting back on our quality assurance budget, even if we are facing decreased sales revenue until we can find a way to increase that revenue accordingly. Of course, in addition to diving deeply into these sort of multidimensional impacts, it can help to zoom out even further to the most fundamental level in understanding what our problems might be and what we might do about them. This is where asking that most valuable question that business analysts have in their toolkit can once again come in handy, simply asking why? 

Symptoms of problems are often misidentified as root causes, 
and asking why a number of times can be an effective tool to dig deeper into a situation. 
This helps to ensure that our solution proposals are comprehensive and effective as well. 

Oftentimes in business, it can be hard to ask such a simple question, especially to continue to ask it multiple times. It might be seen as rude or offensive by those who are used to discussing things in a more complex level, and it might impair the respect they have for us as a business analyst if they think that we've been too simplistic in the way that we go about this work. And so the exact way that we ask why might change slightly, but we still can peel back the layers here of our understanding until we get to the root of the problem at hand. Let's look at an example here. Say that we received this message from a member of the IT department at an online retailer. They say they've received a request to switch our fulfillment center to a new order management platform. We respond to this by saying, okay, sounds like a major project. Can you tell me a bit more about what's driving this request? Notice that we actually just asked why here, we just dressed it up a little bit. The response we receive is, Well, about 20% of our orders received are shipping later than our target. The boss thinks the new platform will help. We respond again, Well, we definitely don't want so many orders to ship late to customers, helping to exhibit our empathy for the plight that they're facing here. Do you have any perspective on where the bottlenecks exist currently? Again, the real question we've asked here is why. The person responds, That's just it. We timed the pick 'n pack staff, and they're meeting target, but they often have to wait for the order manifests to come from a line manager and then report back when the order is filled so the supervisor can update the order with the shipping information. This sounds puzzling to us. We respond, Hmm, why is the line manager handling the order manifests and updating the orders manually? I can't imagine that's how our system was intended to work. In this case, the word, why did, in fact, make itself apparent for the first time in this conversation. The person responds, You're right, something sounds off. Let me check it out. A day later, they come back with another response. I was able to speak with the line manager and he says that it's a limitation of the system, and there's nothing we can do about it. However, I checked out the system manual and it looks like he's wrong. Pick/pack staff should be able to do all of this from their mobiles rather than using paper copies printed by the line manager. We respond, So maybe we don't need a new system after all. Is there any reason the line manager wouldn't be aware of this feature? Again, we're digging deeper. The problem isn't that the system can't handle it, the problem here seems to be that the line manager didn't know, but why didn't the line manager know such a simple and important piece of information, leading him to undertake such a ridiculously inefficient process? We received the response, He did recently transfer from another facility using an older system. Maybe that was true for the last version and no one's trained him on the newer one yet. Well, let's continue digging deeper by responding. Is there any reason he wouldn't have received that training when he transferred over? The IT guy responds, We conduct training semi‑annually. Checking over his records, it looks like he might have missed the last training session by a couple of weeks. At last, we've arrived at the problem here. It wasn't a problem with our pick 'n pack team being too slow or with our software not having the features that we need or even with our training protocols such as they exist, but rather with our understanding of when and how that training might take place and how we make it available to those who might transfer in between those training cycles. We respond, There we go then. Let's make sure to get them trained up and let's put a plan in place to ensure any new transfers or additions receive training during orientation rather than waiting for the next general training session. Sounds good to me. I'll get right on, comes the reply. Here, we have saved potentially literally millions of dollars that might have been deployed in order to upgrade a system that, in fact, had no flaws or problems with it whatsoever within the context of this particular challenge. By digging a little deeper, by listening carefully to the the information that we receive, responding to it with a sense of curiosity, we can help others, as business analysts, dig deeper into the challenges that they face to find the true solutions that are oftentimes surprisingly simple and hiding just below the surface.