
# Understanding Lean software development
## where Lean comes from
In 1990, the book The Machine that Changed the World dubbed the Toyota production system and implementations of it elsewhere lean production. Taking the lessons of lean production and applying them to software, Mary and Tom Poppendieck published the book Implementing Lean Software Development in 2003. To forestall any confusion, this was done very much in the context of emerging agile practices with the Agile Manifesto having been released 2 years prior in 2001. Lean is agile, though not all agile is necessarily lean.

## The Principles of Lean Development

You're probably already getting the sense of the principal devil in lean practices, waste. Not every system is optimized for eliminating waste. Sometimes speed is the most important thing. There is an apocryphal story about a sign at a production plant creating the lunar lander in the '60s. You can waste anything but time. But I've got another unifying principle for you to think about as we move ahead and talk about the principles of lean development. If you aim at speed, you may get speed, but you'll get waste. If you aim at the elimination of waste, you'll eliminate waste and get speed. And man, if that's true for manufacturing cars or lunar landers, it's true 10x for software development. Consider what happens when a bug is caught by a customer. At best, it was annoyance. And at worst, there's been some substantial compromise of that relationship. Now, push that bug's detection back to just before release. It's still a pain because now you need to delay that release, but the cost of the bug is greatly diminished. Push that bug back to a code review shortly after it was committed to version control. Now, most people in the organization never even know about it. Only the code reviewer, the programmer, and maybe the manager. Now let's press the bug back to the development process itself. The programmer writes a test to verify their code, finds the bug, fixes it, and no one but the programmer ever knows. So what does it look like to press back one final level where even the programmer never has to know about the bug? You write the test first and create the code to satisfy it. This is not to say that this process inescapably creates bug‑free code because, after all, the test is code too, and this doesn't account for bugs that the test doesn't anticipate. But writing code test first forces you to focus on what you can be certain about and deforms the code into more humble propositions. More on this idea later. The Poppendieck book outlines seven principles for applying what we understand about lean and the Toyota production system to what we're trying to do with software. We're going to move through these seven principles in pretty much rapid fire succession. The first principle, and it should be no surprise by now, eliminate waste. What we mean exactly by waste is a multidimensional question, and we'll take the whole next segment to break it down. But if you've worked in software, you probably have a good idea of what this looks like. Having to go back and fix a bug is waste, assuming that there was some way to prevent it from being created in the first place. And more fundamentally, doing the same thing over and over, assuming that this is a human being and not a machine we're talking about. Doing the same thing over and over again is not liberating the potential of a human being, so we can consider it waste and look at it as something we should eliminate.


# wastes

## the seven wastes by Crhis Behrens in DevOps Foundations: Core Concepts and Fundamentals

Waste is the quintessential devil in lean. But what is waste? It's easy to look at something, like deferred commitment, and identify transitional forms that are later abandoned as waste. But this is only true in light of the final product. Looked at in a process context, it's not waste. It's just a link in the chain that leads to the final version. 

So it's important for us to thoughtfully consider what we mean precisely by waste. 

The Poppendiecks identify seven primary wastes for lean development. 

Partially done work probably means something at first blush, at least to a programmer. But the definition here is broader than you think. If you're a programmer or if you've worked with one, you've probably heard that a feature is 90% complete only to learn eventually that half of the work to bring the feature to production still remained. The programmer is delivering an honest estimate, but only of the work to create the logic involved, which is only a small part of the total work. One of the things I was trying to explain to the manager who was resistant to test‑driven development was that having code completed without tests only gave you the illusion of completion. Completion really happened after a bunch of painful and expensive human testing. An extra feature is a feature that was produced at the wrong time. What the right time might be is immaterial. The right time might be later, or it might be never. A feature created just in case is an extra feature, and it is waste. Again, the fact that it might be needed later is immaterial. An early feature is the equivalent of an overproduced part sitting on a shelf, taking up real estate, time, and money. If you hear this and you think, well, we have to create early features that might be needed because it would be difficult to retool later on, there is your problem. Features created just in case instead of just in time are a smell that your situation is not as agile as it needs to be to react to changing conditions later on. Relearning is the acquisition of knowledge, which has already happened before. This can be the relearning of something you did before, or it can be the necessary knowledge transfer due to turnover. This is a form of waste that's difficult to eliminate 100%. Even the greatest organizations in the world are going to have some turnover, and reality often means that you have to shift your attention away from a particular domain and return to it later on. The solution to this is the principle we talked about, create knowledge. This knowledge can exist in the form of documentation, it can exist in the form of a human being, but it can also exist subtly in the form of a design, which is simpler to comprehend, reducing this kind of waste and friction. I worked for a company I loved for a long time until I decided I needed to move on for growth reasons. I had an enormous amount of domain knowledge that I had worked hard to get into documents, videos, code comments, and most of all by transferring it to another developer before I left. I left and I came back at an hourly rate a couple of times to help the struggling developer out with what we'd covered. But after not too long, he threw up his hands and quit. Not long after that, the projects I'd worked so hard to document and transfer foundered and were cancelled. This is an appalling example of waste. What could we have done to prevent it? We could have recorded those handoff sessions. That would have been a pain frankly, but then a lot of the knowledge that wasn't composed correctly in those documents and videos I created could have been captured. Secondly, we could have been more deliberate about cross‑training all along. A big part of this was a series of complex data imports that weren't entirely automated. If we had a rule that each time we did it it had to be a different developer, we'd have been in much better shape with this. But above all, the company could have worked harder to hold on to both of us. These projects, net of my salary and some minor infrastructure costs, conservatively made the company a few $100,000 per year. They would have run for at least another 5 years. You do the math. The company was clearly not calculating the real cost of losing these two particular employees. It would have made sense to give either one of us a huge raise to stick around. Task switching. Okay, I've beat this drum in other courses, so I'll just cover it briefly here. People grossly underestimate the cognitive cost of task switching, particularly for deep intellectual work. People think that they're good multitaskers. They are not. No one is. We just don't work that way period, full stop, no elaboration or qualification needed. The elaboration or yes, but to the statement humans cannot multitask is entirely composed of the reasons why we falsely believe that we can multitask. In short, the best scientific estimate is that the penalty is 40%. If you have two tasks that performed in serial take you an hour each, switching once in the middle will make the incomplete task take 40% longer. And that's assuming that you only switch once. If you've been paying attention, you're starting to get the sense that each of these wastes relates to the absence or underemployment of one of the principles. Delays happen primarily because authority is concentrated at the wrong level, an implication of respect to people. Delays can also happen because of siloed communication. You can't just walked over to the DBA or pick up the phone and get a question answered. Delays can happen because a team failed to defer commitment and cannot now pivot to adjust to a change in circumstances. Defects. Above all, like we've talked about, defects derail your processes. And in a sense, defects are kind of all of these different kinds of wastes combined together. Finding a defect late in the process means the developer has to task switch from their new work, relearn what it was that they intended when they wrote it, and complete the partially done work that led to the defect. And that's assuming that the developer who wrote it is available or even at the company anymore or even alive. If they're not, we're back to the handoff waste. It's not quite true that you can have no waste when you have no defects. But defects are a sign that you're not managing the other wastes.

## the seven wastes by Stephen Haunts in Lean Software Development Fundamentals

Lean philosophy regards everything not adding value to the customer as waste, or muda

In order to eliminate waste, you need to be able to recognize it. 

If some activity could be bypassed, or the result could be achieved without it, it is a waste. In Lean software development, there are seven identified waste that we need to be aware of, so let's explore them in more detail. 

First, we have defects. Defects are anything in your code and system that is not working as expected. Defects cause expensive rework and the time of a tester or QA engineer to find the defect in the first place. This time in finding the defects is non‑value added waste. The biggest waste here is if a defect makes it through into production and causes the customer a problem. 

The next waste we have is that of extra features. As developers, it's very tempting to add in lots of features to solve all known scenarios in a software solution, but adding in extra features is also a waste, as that code needs to be tested and maintained, even if it's not directly bringing any value to your own customer. Every line of code that is added to assist then increases the complexity and adds some potential failure points. So you should only add code that is necessary to satisfy your customer's requirements. If any code is not needed now, then putting it into your system should be considered a waste. For anyone that has worked on large waterfall projects before, the concept of handoffs will be familiar. You might be familiar with something like the following. A business analyst writes up a large requirements design document. This is then handed off to architects to perform a system design. Once the architects have done a complex system design, they then hand off the design to a development team. The development team then writes the code and then hands it off to a QA team. Each handoff stage, there's a lot of knowledge that is lost through the handoff, as it is not possible to record every bit of information that has been discovered. This means that by the time the developers write the code, the gap in their knowledge to that of the business analyst can be quite large. Therefore, if you want to limit this knowledge loss, you should avoid formal handoffs between teams. This is why in Agile and Scrum, they advocate each role being a part of the product team, sitting and working with each other closely. This tight team working in collaboration helps to ensure knowledge is shared across the team. Any kind of delay on a project is considered waste. For example, if a member of the team must seek answers to a question and the person they need to talk to is not available straightaway, a delay is caused, and this creates waste. Without getting this correct answer straightaway, the team member might be forced to switch to another task, guess the answer, and risk doing rework, or trying to research the answers themselves, which may take up valuable time and still result in the wrong answer. Next, we have partially completed work. This is any code that has been started, but not completed. So, what is completed? Really, for any work to be considered completed, it should be deployed into production in generating value and benefit for the end user. Code that is not complete and just left to linger can potentially become obsolete, and you never have any idea if it will work or not. If code is never used, as a project, you have already paid for that code to be written, but if it never makes it into a user's hands, then that code will not start paying back, which makes it a sunk cost. This type of sunk cost is one of the worst kinds of waste, as it is costing actual money, which is being thrown away. The next waste we have is that of task switching. One of the biggest disruptions you can do to a software developer is to have them switch tasks. This requires a lot of mental shifting from one train of thought to another. It takes time for a developer to focus their brain on the task to be effective with problem solving. Switching to another task before they are ready restarts the process of them getting started. If you need a developer to work on two tasks, the fastest way for them to achieve this is to concentrate on one at a time, complete the first task, and then move on to the second. If they flip between the two tasks, it will take them longer to complete the work. The final waste we'll look at is unneeded process. Have you ever worked with an organization where you must go through a very lengthy process just to get some simple software changes deployed? I have many times, and it is painful. I used to work for a health care provider, and we needed to deploy a small data change that just added two rows to a database table. As you can imagine, this was a very simple SQL script that was first tested in a test environment. The process to get this deployed involved a developer having to write deployment and rollback instructions and a QA engineer to write a test report. I then had to go into a change management system and raise a change request that had a three‑day lead time and required five people to sign off on the change. I had to chase each of these five people to get their approval before the change was due to start. This small and very low‑risk change had to go through the same process that a huge high‑risk change would. It involved my time, a developer, a QA engineer, and then finally, the time of an engineer who had to be booked to run the script in production. This seemingly simple change required a lot of time and resources. This was incredibly wasteful. Of course, in heavily regulated environments, a strict change control process might be required, but the process should be suitable to the complexity and the risk of the change. In my example, it wasn't. Even for a very low‑risk change, we had to use the same process that a major high‑risk change would go through. In Mary and Tom Poppendieck's book, Lean Software Development: An Agile Toolkit, they mention that if you do have to carry out paperwork that assists with customer value, there are three rules you should consider. Keep it short, keep it high level, do it offline. These are certainly good rules to live by. Now that we've looked at some of the examples of wasting software developments, let's look at a technique for helping to detect waste in the system you are building. Let's look at value stream maps.


## How do we practically reduce waste and practically respect people in a DevOps context?: Creating Quality in a Lean Context

A big part of lean, and any kind of same management, is Pareto analysis, also known as 80/20 analysis. 

Put simply, the Pareto principle says that 80% of the consequences come from 20% of the causes. 
The biggest bang for the buck that a DevOps implementation can deliver is reducing the defect rate. And in my experience, the Pareto principle applies deeply to code, that most of your problems come from what I call a bad neighborhood in code. The place that, when it comes up in conversation, everybody says man, you don't want to go there. And that's where you need to go, fear‑driven development and all and if you want to knock out those defects on a Pareto‑principle basis. In the absence of something as easily measurable as defect rate, we can look to more human measures. I worked at a place that had me doing all kinds of deployment automation, automated source scanning, and a bunch of crazy cool stuff, all while no developer could debug locally. This made development slow, error‑prone, and, above all, miserable. If we were employing the respect people principle as a priority, we would have made it so that people could more effectively get their work done. That's a programmer example, but this applies equally well to other roles. At another company, I always made complaints that the support engineers made about the admin interface to an application I managed a top priority. And as a consequence, they ended up with first‑class tools to take care of our customers with problems. One of the effects of having been a programmer for many years is that I look for similarity in processes and tools and see those things as opportunities for merging, combining, and creating interoperability. Rather than having a dozen different software builds, which are only different because of minor changes in where the code is organized and how it's named, let's make a few minor commits to reorganize things and use one true build that can be parameterized to accommodate slight changes. Let's get our support engineers cross‑trained on performing that import so that we can avoid handoffs when someone goes out the door, even if it's only on vacation. And above all, if we do something twice, when the time comes to do it a third time, let's take a little longer and automate it instead.

# Lean Principles and Applying Lean to Software Development

from Oreilly The Art of Lean Software Development

### Lean Principles
Taiichi Ohno started with Just-In-Time and autonomation, the two pillars of the Toyota Production System. 
Modern-day Lean has settled on five principles and a wide array of practices that have been distilled from the Toyota Production System and the experiences of other companies that have followed Toyota’s lead. 

1. Value Value is defined by the customer. What does the customer value in the product? You have to understand what is and what is not value in the eye of the customer in order to map the value stream.
2. Value stream Once you know what the customer values in your product, you can create a value stream map that identifies the series of steps required to produce the product. Each step is categorized as either value-added, non-value-added but necessary, or non-value-added waste.
3. Flow The production process must be designed to flow continuously. If the value chain stops moving forward (for any reason), waste is occurring.
4. Pull Let customer orders pull product (value). This pull cascades back through the value stream and ensures that nothing is made before it is needed, thus eliminating most in-process inventory.
5. Perfection Strive for perfection by continually identifying and removing waste.

## Applying Lean to Software Development
	Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler. 
														—Albert Einstein

### Lean Software Development


#### Eliminate Waste


# ## 